in this video let us have an introduction to circular
linked List So circular linked lists are very much similar
to normal linked list
But the only difference is that in normal linked list
the last node will be pointing null
But in circular linked list the nodes are connected in
a circular manner so the last node will be linked
to the first node again
So in a circular linked list the last nodes
next will be connected to head and we can have
circular singly Linked list as well
A circular
doubly linked list
Let us see a sample programme to create a circular
singly Linked list with three nodes with data 10
20 and 30
So first we need to create and then we should
have next of node type and it is used to
refer to a next node
So write node next
Now let us declared the node head middle and last
so memories allocated in the stack
Now we can use new to allocate memory dynamically for
each node
So right head equal to new node so memory will
be allocated in the heap section and it's reference will
be returned
Similarly
Memories allocated in heap for middle node and last node
So now we have the nodes next we need values in
these nodes
So let us assigned the values 10 20 and 30 to these
nodes so the values will be stored in the data
Part of the node so write
Head dot data equal to 10 and middle dot data equal
to 20 and last dot data equal to 30 so
the values are stored in the nodes
The next step is these
Nodes should be linked
That is the linked list should be like head node
linked to middle node
Middle node linked to last node and last node linked
to head again then only it becomes a circular linked
list so let us linked them using the reference part
Firstly the next of first node should point to the
second node
So said head dot next equal to middle so 2000
will be stored in the next of head
now let us handle
The middle node
It's next should be pointing the last node so write
middle dot next equal to last so 3000 will be
stored in next of middle and the last node
It's next should point the head
Node so write last dot next equal to head
And now we have a circular linked list with three
nodes
Now let us print
Each nodes data in the linked list
So to print each nodes data we have to traverse
the linked list fully
Normally we traverse the linked list from head till we
reach the end but there is no end in a
circular linked list
It is cyclic but there is no end in
a circular linked list
It is
cyclic
The last node will point to the head and this
cycle will continue So we have to traverse from head
till we reach the head again
So let us use the display function to print the
data so we have public void display
First we need to check if the head is null
then the linked list is empty so we just need
to return first check
If head equal to null Then the linked list is
empty so we can just return
Otherwise we need to create a temporary node temp and
initialised to head node
So right node Temp equal to head so temp is pointing
to head and we have to traverse the list print
the nodes data till we reach the head again so
we can use a do while loop instead of normal
while loop
So we have do while tempt not equal to head
So first the data will be printed and then temp
will be moved to the next node and the next
node will be checked
And when temp reaches head again the traversal is completed
So write system dot out dot Println of temp dot
data and then move temp to next node
write temp equal to temp dot Next
So in first iteration so in first iteration print temp
data so it prints 10 and now temp is moved
to the next node so temp now points to 2000
Now check the condition it holds
So start the next iteration and print the data at
Address 2000 which is 20 now moved temp to the
next node
So now temp is equal to 3000
Now check
The condition temp is not equal to head so condition
holds
So starting next iteration print the data at Address 3000
which is 30 and now move temp to the next
node
So now temp is equal 1000
Now check The condition again temp is equal to 1000 which
is equal to head
So the condition temp not equal to head fails and control
comes out of the loop
So that is how we can print each nodes data
in a circular linked list
The only difference is that since the last node is pointing
the head and not null we have to Traverse from
head till we reach the head again
And not till we reach any node pointing to null
So that's all and thank you for watching this video